docs: add manage dashboards as code overview (#5448) (#7029)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/dashboards/manage-dashboards-as-code.md

- **Skip the data view**, because {{esql}} queries indices by name rather than through a saved data view.

The result carries no external references, so the dashboard stays fully portable. For a panel that can't use {{esql}}, define it by value and back it with an [ad-hoc data view](../find-and-organize/data-views.md#_create_a_temporary_data_source) to keep it just as self-contained.

### Assign matching IDs to referenced objects [dashboards-as-code-portability-ids]

If you keep references to saved objects, give each object the same ID in every environment so the references always resolve:

- **Dashboards and library visualizations**: create them with the [Dashboards API](https://elastic.github.io/dashboards-api-spec/dashboards#tag/Dashboards) and [Visualizations API](https://elastic.github.io/dashboards-api-spec/visualizations#tag/Visualizations) using `PUT` (upsert) with a chosen ID (`PUT /api/dashboards/{id}` or `PUT /api/visualizations/{id}`), rather than `POST`, which generates a new ID each time. Because the exported definition already contains these IDs, re-importing it with `PUT` recreates the same objects, with the same IDs, in the target environment.

> - **Data views**: create them with a chosen ID, either through the [Data Views API]({{kib-apis}}operation/operation-createdataviewdefaultw) by passing an `id` in the request, or in the UI by setting a **Custom data view ID** under [advanced settings](../find-and-organize/data-views.md#settings-create-pattern). Use human-readable IDs, such as `logs-prod`, so they are easy to reuse and recognize.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Data views**: create them with a chosen ID, either through the [Data Views API]({{kib-apis}}operation/operation-createdataviewdefaultw) by passing an `id` in the POST request, or in the UI by setting a **Custom data view ID** under [advanced settings](../find-and-organize/data-views.md#settings-create-pattern). Use human-readable IDs, such as `logs-prod`, so they are easy to reuse and recognize.
```

> - **Data views**: create them with a chosen ID, either through the [Data Views API]({{kib-apis}}operation/operation-createdataviewdefaultw) by passing an `id` in the POST request, or in the UI by setting a **Custom data view ID** under [advanced settings](../find-and-organize/data-views.md#settings-create-pattern). Use human-readable IDs, such as `logs-prod`, so they are easy to reuse and recognize.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Data views**: create them with a chosen ID, either through the [Data Views API]({{kib-apis}}operation/operation-createdataviewdefaultw) by passing an `id` in the POST request, or in the UI by [setting a **Custom data view ID**](../find-and-organize/data-views.md#settings-create-pattern). Use human-readable IDs, such as `logs-prod`, so they are easy to reuse and recognize.
```

Regardless of the approach, to deploy a dashboard to a different space within the same cluster, include the destination space's ID in the request URL. The [JSON export flow](sharing.md#export-dashboard-json) can open a pre-populated request in {{kib}} Dev Tools Console, where you set the destination space before sending it.

## Automate with Terraform [dashboards-as-code-terraform]

If you already manage your infrastructure with Terraform, the [Elastic Stack Terraform provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/elastic/elasticstack/latest/docs/resources/kibana_dashboard) includes an `elasticstack_kibana_dashboard` resource that manages dashboards through the Dashboards API. You define the dashboard in the provider's own configuration schema, then apply it like any other resource, so dashboard changes flow through `terraform plan` and `terraform apply` alongside the rest of your stack.

> Terraform is the IaC option that Elastic maintains and documents. Because `elasticstack_kibana_dashboard` is a standard Terraform provider resource, other IaC tools that support Terraform providers can manage it too, including from languages other than HCL.

Author: ```suggestion
:::{tip}
Because `elasticstack_kibana_dashboard` is a standard Terraform provider resource, other IaC tools that support Terraform providers can manage it too, including from languages other than HCL.
:::
```

The main challenge in moving a dashboard between spaces, clusters, or stages is that a dashboard and the objects it references, such as data views and library visualizations, are matched by ID. Because these IDs are auto-generated and differ across environments, a dashboard exported from one environment can point at objects that don't exist in another, and its panels show no data until the references resolve.

To keep a dashboard portable, choose one of the following approaches, listed from most to least automated.

### Manage dashboards with Terraform [dashboards-as-code-portability-terraform]

If you already manage infrastructure as code, the Terraform provider handles ID consistency for you: it tracks each resource and maps IDs per environment, so references stay consistent as you promote a dashboard from development to production. Refer to [Automate with Terraform](#dashboards-as-code-terraform).

### Define panels with {{esql}} [dashboards-as-code-portability-inline]

The most portable way to build a panel is to define its visualization with [{{esql}}](/explore-analyze/query-filter/languages/esql-kibana.md) directly in the dashboard. This lets you:

> - **Keep the visualization inline**, so its definition lives in the dashboard rather than pointing to a standalone [library visualization](create-dashboards-programmatically.md#lens-visualizations-api) that must already exist, with a matching ID, in the target environment.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Keep the visualization definition inline**, so it lives in the dashboard rather than pointing to a standalone [library visualization](create-dashboards-programmatically.md#lens-visualizations-api) that must already exist, with a matching ID, in the target environment.
```
